docs/unit-2/debugging-js.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 10
---

# Debugging Javascript

While you're working on all this code, it's helpful to have as much detail as you want available. So here are some recommendations to make developing & debugging a little easier within the NodeJS world.


## Fast Reloads with Nodemon

`nodemon` is a tool that will monitor your node app, and restart the app if it detects any changes in your code.

```
npm install --save nodemon
```

Usage:
```
nodemon app.js
```

## Using the Debugger

In the browser, you could use the Debugger from within Chrome Dev Tools and step through your code. You can replicate the same thing in VS Code, but it takes a couple of steps.

### Using the UI

1. Go to the Run and Debug tab on the left-side navigation.
2. Don't click on the big blue button, and instead click on the link below that says "create a launch.json" file. This will create a .vscode/launch.json file in your workspace.
3. Click on the Add Configuration blue button in the bottom right corner
4. Select `Node.js: Launch via NPM`. This adds a new configuration to the `configurations` array in launch.json
5. Update `runtimeArgs` to be one of your npm scripts like `[ 'run-scripts', 'test' ]` or `[ 'run-scripts', 'test-db' ]`
6. Add a `debugger` statement somewhere in your code
7. Click the Play button in the Run & Debug panel
8. Run your code and watch it pause. From here you can view the current variable state

### Using launch.json

Create a `.vscode/launch.json` file and include the snippets below:
* Run `npm test` in debug mode
* Run `npm start` in debug mode

```json
{
  "version": "0.2.0",
  "configurations": [
    {
      // highlight-next-line
      "name": "npm test",
      "request": "launch",
      // highlight-next-line
      "runtimeArgs": ["run-script", "test"],
      "runtimeExecutable": "npm",
      "skipFiles": ["<node_internals>/**"],
      "type": "node"
    },
    {
      // highlight-next-line
      "name": "npm start",
      "request": "launch",
      // highlight-next-line
      "runtimeArgs": ["run-script", "start"],
      "runtimeExecutable": "npm",
      "skipFiles": ["<node_internals>/**"],
      "type": "node"
    }
  ]
}
```
* The `name` property is the name you see in the Run & Debug panel.
* The `runtimeArgs` refers to the command you want to run - anything that appears in package.json under the `scripts` property can be run this way.

## View Access Logs

Similar to the Access Logs that we viewed from our web server for static websites, we can see similar traffic for our express server. We'll need to install a tool called `morgan` [[link to docs](https://expressjs.com/en/resources/middleware/morgan.html)]that can log this information to the console.

```
npm install --save morgan
```

and then add

```js title="app.js"
import express from 'express'
// highlight-next-line
import morgan from 'morgan'

app.use(express.json())
...
// highlight-next-line
app.use(morgan(combined))
```

The next time you receive a request, you'll see this in your console:

```
App is running on port 8000
::1 - - [13/Mar/2023:03:03:30 +0000] "GET / HTTP/1.1" 200 11 "-" "PostmanRuntime/7.26.10"
::1 - - [13/Mar/2023:03:04:11 +0000] "GET /chatroom HTTP/1.1" 404 147 "-" "PostmanRuntime/7.26.10"
```

Commit message:

Adding link to launch.json gist

docs/unit-2/debugging-js.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 10
---

# Debugging Javascript

While you're working on all this code, it's helpful to have as much detail as you want available. So here are some recommendations to make developing & debugging a little easier within the NodeJS world.


## Fast Reloads with Nodemon

`nodemon` is a tool that will monitor your node app, and restart the app if it detects any changes in your code.

```
npm install --save nodemon
```

Usage:
```
nodemon app.js
```

## Using the Debugger

In the browser, you could use the Debugger from within Chrome Dev Tools and step through your code. You can replicate the same thing in VS Code, but it takes a couple of steps.

### Using the UI

1. Go to the Run and Debug tab on the left-side navigation.
2. Don't click on the big blue button, and instead click on the link below that says "create a launch.json" file. This will create a .vscode/launch.json file in your workspace.
3. Click on the Add Configuration blue button in the bottom right corner
4. Select `Node.js: Launch via NPM`. This adds a new configuration to the `configurations` array in launch.json
5. Update `runtimeArgs` to be one of your npm scripts like `[ 'run-scripts', 'test' ]` or `[ 'run-scripts', 'test-db' ]`
6. Add a `debugger` statement somewhere in your code
7. Click the Play button in the Run & Debug panel
8. Run your code and watch it pause. From here you can view the current variable state

### Using launch.json

::: info

Note: If you want to debug your scripts from Milestone 2, copy and paste this gist into your .vscode/launch.json file in your repository:

https://gist.github.com/intricatecloud/8d2727ff3c3af3b2fd08f82e4a052622

:::

Create a `.vscode/launch.json` file and include the snippets below:
* Run `npm test` in debug mode
* Run `npm start` in debug mode

```json
{
  "version": "0.2.0",
  "configurations": [
    {
      // highlight-next-line
      "name": "npm test",
      "request": "launch",
      // highlight-next-line
      "runtimeArgs": ["run-script", "test"],
      "runtimeExecutable": "npm",
      "skipFiles": ["<node_internals>/**"],
      "type": "node"
    },
    {
      // highlight-next-line
      "name": "npm start",
      "request": "launch",
      // highlight-next-line
      "runtimeArgs": ["run-script", "start"],
      "runtimeExecutable": "npm",
      "skipFiles": ["<node_internals>/**"],
      "type": "node"
    }
  ]
}
```
* The `name` property is the name you see in the Run & Debug panel.
* The `runtimeArgs` refers to the command you want to run - anything that appears in package.json under the `scripts` property can be run this way.

## View Access Logs

Similar to the Access Logs that we viewed from our web server for static websites, we can see similar traffic for our express server. We'll need to install a tool called `morgan` [[link to docs](https://expressjs.com/en/resources/middleware/morgan.html)]that can log this information to the console.

```
npm install --save morgan
```

and then add

```js title="app.js"
import express from 'express'
// highlight-next-line
import morgan from 'morgan'

app.use(express.json())
...
// highlight-next-line
app.use(morgan(combined))
```

The next time you receive a request, you'll see this in your console:

```
App is running on port 8000
::1 - - [13/Mar/2023:03:03:30 +0000] "GET / HTTP/1.1" 200 11 "-" "PostmanRuntime/7.26.10"
::1 - - [13/Mar/2023:03:04:11 +0000] "GET /chatroom HTTP/1.1" 404 147 "-" "PostmanRuntime/7.26.10"
```
