docs/unit-2/hosting/deploy-react-to-firebase.mdx, before:

---
sidebar_position: 14
---
import AppMermaid from './_app-mermaid.mdx';

# Deploy React to Firebase Hosting

This guide assumes that you're working with the milestone-2 template, which has this folder structure:

```
|-- backend
|   |-- package.json
|   |-- ...
|-- frontend
|   |-- package.json
|   |-- ...
```

This walkthrough follows along with [the Firebase docs](https://firebase.google.com/docs/hosting/functions) using an existing Express project. They have some info on setting up Firebase with Express, but there were a couple of extra steps to be aware of.

## Architecture

For this project, we're working with a separate frontend + backend application.

Our frontend application is a React project, built with [create-react-app](https://create-react-app.dev/). This application runs in your browser, and would be hosted with Firebase Hosting.

Our backend application is a Node project, built with [expressjs.com](https://expressjs.com/). This runs on a server, and would be hosted using Firebase Cloud Functions.

:::info

Using Firebase Cloud Functions __requires__ providing a credit card and upgrading to the Firebase Blaze plan.

The Blaze plan still uses the free tier, and keeps a credit card on file for when you exceed the free tier usage.

For the purposes of this class, the usage is incredibly small, and there's very little risk of incurring ANY charge.

That said, mistakes happen and occasionally an infinite loop finds its way into our code. Firebase lets you set alerts when you spend more than $X that month. They also provide an emulator that we'll be using in this guide.

:::

When we host it, it'll work something like this

<AppMermaid />

* __This guide will setup Firebase Hosting for our frontend__
* The user can visit `/`, `/instructor-home`, `/login`, and `/logout` pages
* Any requests to `/api` would be sent to our backend (this is the [next section](./deploy-express-to-firebase.mdx))


## Install Firebase

Since we have 2 projects in one repository, we could setup Firebase once, and tweak it work with both projects.

* Make sure you are using Node v16+
* The default installation process will create a firebase.json and extra files that you won't be needing for this process. We'll be tweaking all the defaults anyway.

__Step 1:__ Starting from the root of your repository, run `npm install -g firebase-tools` which will install the firebase CLI.

You can then run `npx firebase --help` to make sure your installation is working. `npx` is a shorthand for “npm execute” where it will download and install a package and let you run it from the command line. [See here for more info](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/npm-vs-npx-whats-the-difference/).

__Step 2:__ Go to the [Firebase Console](https://console.firebase.google.com/u/0/), and create a new project via the Web Console. __Don't__ reuse your Milestone 1 project.


## Frontend: Firebase Hosting

### Create a Build

Our React application has two very convenient features.
* It has a development mode that you've been using with `npm start`
* It has a build mode that we can use to create a "build" - a folder filled with HTML, CSS, and JS that's managed by our React application.

Create a build:
```console
cd frontend/
npm build
```

You'll see something like:
```
> frontend@0.1.0 build
> react-scripts build

Creating an optimized production build...
```

At the end of this process, you can take a look at the `build/` folder. It will contain all the HTML, CSS, and JS that your application needs to run, including any libraries that you use with the `import` statement!

### Setup Firebase Hosting

From the root of the workspace, run `npx firebase init hosting` and follow the prompts.

* Use the existing project you made in the earlier step.
* For your public directory, use `frontend/build`
* Configure it as a Single Page App
* Don't set up automatic builds & deploys with Github yet. This can be setup later.
* Don't overwrite any files.

You'll now see new files:

```plain
|-- backend
|   |-- package.json
|   |-- ...
|-- frontend
|   |-- package.json
|   |-- ...
// highlight-start
|-- node_modules
|-- .firebaserc
|-- firebase.json
// highlight-end
```
.firebaserc should show the Firebase Project ID you selected during setup.

firebase.json should look like:
```json
{
  "hosting": {
    // highlight-next-line
    "public": "frontend/build",
    "ignore": [
      "firebase.json",
      "**/.*",
      "**/node_modules/**"
    ],
    // highlight-start
    "rewrites": [
      {
        "source": "**",
        "destination": "/index.html"
      }
    ]
    // highlight-end
  }
}
```

* The `hosting.public` property should be pointing to your `frontend/build` folder.
* The `hosting.rewrites` property should be set to take all paths, `"source": "**"` and redirect them to `/index.html`. This is required for React applications (using Routing) to work correctly.

### Using the Emulator

The Emulator is useful to double check if your Firebase configuration would work when you ACTUALLY deploy to Firebase. It's also a way to use some of their products in a test environment where you won't accidentally incur a bill.

`npx firebase emulators:start` Run the local emulator so you can check that the Hello World HTML page is being served by Firebase Hosting.

The output should tell you the URL you can use to view your site locally - by default, its localhost:5000. It still won't be functional yet until we do the backend.

You’ll see this if everything is set up correctly.

```console
☁  milestone-2-da335 [main]: npx firebase emulators:start
i  emulators: Starting emulators: hosting
i  hosting[dperez-m2]: Serving hosting files from: frontend/build
✔  hosting[dperez-m2]: Local server: http://127.0.0.1:5000
⚠  emulators: The Emulator UI is not starting, either because none of the emulated products have an interaction layer in Emulator UI or it cannot determine the Project ID. Pass the --project flag to specify a project.

┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ ✔  All emulators ready! It is now safe to connect your app. │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

┌──────────┬────────────────┐
│ Emulator │ Host:Port      │
├──────────┼────────────────┤
│ Hosting  │ 127.0.0.1:5000 │
└──────────┴────────────────┘
  Emulator Hub running at 127.0.0.1:4400
  Other reserved ports: 4500
```

We're at a good spot to deploy our code, even if the backend isn't hooked up yet.

Run from the root of your workspace:
```
npx firebase deploy --only hosting
```
This will take all the code in your `frontend/build` folder, and deploy it to Firebase. If you visit your Hosting URL, you should see the deployed, but a bunch of errors in the console.

Now, proceed to the next section to deploy your Express app.

Commit message:

Adding warning about cornell accounts

docs/unit-2/hosting/deploy-react-to-firebase.mdx, after:

---
sidebar_position: 14
---
import AppMermaid from './_app-mermaid.mdx';

# Deploy React to Firebase Hosting

:::danger

For Milestone 2, you need to use a Firebase account that is NOT linked to your @cornell.edu account. Create a new Firebase account linked to another email.

There are Cornell security restrictions in Google Cloud that prevent @cornell.edu accounts from creating public Cloud Functions. So the solution is to use any other email for your Firebase account.

:::

This guide assumes that you're working with the milestone-2 template, which has this folder structure:

```
|-- backend
|   |-- package.json
|   |-- ...
|-- frontend
|   |-- package.json
|   |-- ...
```

This walkthrough follows along with [the Firebase docs](https://firebase.google.com/docs/hosting/functions) using an existing Express project. They have some info on setting up Firebase with Express, but there were a couple of extra steps to be aware of.

## Architecture

For this project, we're working with a separate frontend + backend application.

Our frontend application is a React project, built with [create-react-app](https://create-react-app.dev/). This application runs in your browser, and would be hosted with Firebase Hosting.

Our backend application is a Node project, built with [expressjs.com](https://expressjs.com/). This runs on a server, and would be hosted using Firebase Cloud Functions.

:::info

Using Firebase Cloud Functions __requires__ providing a credit card and upgrading to the Firebase Blaze plan.

The Blaze plan still uses the free tier, and keeps a credit card on file for when you exceed the free tier usage.

For the purposes of this class, the usage is incredibly small, and there's very little risk of incurring ANY charge.

That said, mistakes happen and occasionally an infinite loop finds its way into our code. Firebase lets you set alerts when you spend more than $X that month. They also provide an emulator that we'll be using in this guide.

:::

When we host it, it'll work something like this

<AppMermaid />

* __This guide will setup Firebase Hosting for our frontend__
* The user can visit `/`, `/instructor-home`, `/login`, and `/logout` pages
* Any requests to `/api` would be sent to our backend (this is the [next section](./deploy-express-to-firebase.mdx))


## Install Firebase

Since we have 2 projects in one repository, we could setup Firebase once, and tweak it work with both projects.

* Make sure you are using Node v16+
* The default installation process will create a firebase.json and extra files that you won't be needing for this process. We'll be tweaking all the defaults anyway.

__Step 1:__ Starting from the root of your repository, run `npm install -g firebase-tools` which will install the firebase CLI.

You can then run `npx firebase --help` to make sure your installation is working. `npx` is a shorthand for “npm execute” where it will download and install a package and let you run it from the command line. [See here for more info](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/npm-vs-npx-whats-the-difference/).

__Step 2:__ Go to the [Firebase Console](https://console.firebase.google.com/u/0/), and create a new project via the Web Console. __Don't__ reuse your Milestone 1 project.


## Frontend: Firebase Hosting

### Create a Build

Our React application has two very convenient features.
* It has a development mode that you've been using with `npm start`
* It has a build mode that we can use to create a "build" - a folder filled with HTML, CSS, and JS that's managed by our React application.

Create a build:
```console
cd frontend/
npm build
```

You'll see something like:
```
> frontend@0.1.0 build
> react-scripts build

Creating an optimized production build...
```

At the end of this process, you can take a look at the `build/` folder. It will contain all the HTML, CSS, and JS that your application needs to run, including any libraries that you use with the `import` statement!

### Setup Firebase Hosting

From the root of the workspace, run `npx firebase init hosting` and follow the prompts.

* Use the existing project you made in the earlier step.
* For your public directory, use `frontend/build`
* Configure it as a Single Page App
* Don't set up automatic builds & deploys with Github yet. This can be setup later.
* Don't overwrite any files.

You'll now see new files:

```plain
|-- backend
|   |-- package.json
|   |-- ...
|-- frontend
|   |-- package.json
|   |-- ...
// highlight-start
|-- node_modules
|-- .firebaserc
|-- firebase.json
// highlight-end
```
.firebaserc should show the Firebase Project ID you selected during setup.

firebase.json should look like:
```json
{
  "hosting": {
    // highlight-next-line
    "public": "frontend/build",
    "ignore": [
      "firebase.json",
      "**/.*",
      "**/node_modules/**"
    ],
    // highlight-start
    "rewrites": [
      {
        "source": "**",
        "destination": "/index.html"
      }
    ]
    // highlight-end
  }
}
```

* The `hosting.public` property should be pointing to your `frontend/build` folder.
* The `hosting.rewrites` property should be set to take all paths, `"source": "**"` and redirect them to `/index.html`. This is required for React applications (using Routing) to work correctly.

### Using the Emulator

The Emulator is useful to double check if your Firebase configuration would work when you ACTUALLY deploy to Firebase. It's also a way to use some of their products in a test environment where you won't accidentally incur a bill.

`npx firebase emulators:start` Run the local emulator so you can check that the Hello World HTML page is being served by Firebase Hosting.

The output should tell you the URL you can use to view your site locally - by default, its localhost:5000. It still won't be functional yet until we do the backend.

You’ll see this if everything is set up correctly.

```console
☁  milestone-2-da335 [main]: npx firebase emulators:start
i  emulators: Starting emulators: hosting
i  hosting[dperez-m2]: Serving hosting files from: frontend/build
✔  hosting[dperez-m2]: Local server: http://127.0.0.1:5000
⚠  emulators: The Emulator UI is not starting, either because none of the emulated products have an interaction layer in Emulator UI or it cannot determine the Project ID. Pass the --project flag to specify a project.

┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ ✔  All emulators ready! It is now safe to connect your app. │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

┌──────────┬────────────────┐
│ Emulator │ Host:Port      │
├──────────┼────────────────┤
│ Hosting  │ 127.0.0.1:5000 │
└──────────┴────────────────┘
  Emulator Hub running at 127.0.0.1:4400
  Other reserved ports: 4500
```

We're at a good spot to deploy our code, even if the backend isn't hooked up yet.

Run from the root of your workspace:
```
npx firebase deploy --only hosting
```
This will take all the code in your `frontend/build` folder, and deploy it to Firebase. If you visit your Hosting URL, you should see the deployed, but a bunch of errors in the console.

Now, proceed to the next section to deploy your Express app.
